Say anything about that.
No, say anything.
Anything you want.
I think we should speak clearly, and then if you want to tell him not to quote you directly or not to be true.
Or if you say shut that off for a second, I'll shut it off.
But really, you know, this is really to help me to take notes furiously.
I'm not worried.
And I think we should...
Well, for the sake, just tell us, for the record, what each of you do with that, I think.
So, let's start with Andrea here, up by left.
My name is Andrea Grind.
I'm the Special Collection Librarian at the Main Library in the Book Arts and Special Collection Center.
We're located on the sixth floor.
Not quite an ivory tower.
In a room that's not as nice as your old room, in the Old Main.
but at least we have our collection.
I'm Kathy Barmer.
I work at the Presidio branch.
I'm the branch manager of the Presidio branch, chief steward of the Librarian's Guild, and that's significant in terms of all this stuff.
I mean, I wouldn't have gotten involved in this issue probably as the branch manager of the Presidio branch.
Likewise.
I'm also an officer of the Librarian's Guild.
And this is Melissa.
Melissa Riley, and I'm a branch floater.
I'm a part-time but a permanent librarian.
I've worked in the library since something like 1983.
But I work in a lot of different branches, although in recent years I've worked a lot at one particular branch.
And I'm also on the executive board of the Guild, and also I'm the chair of the Intellectual Freedom Committee of the Librarians Guild.
I really was not even in the Guild until after the earthquake, and they started throwing the books at the Presidio branch, where I was at the time, the adult librarian, into the trash, and were going to shut down that building and turn it into a warehouse for all the books that hadn't circulated in less than two years.
They were going to throw away a lot of books and put the rest of them in my branch, which meant they were going to throw the collections I'd worked on building up into the trash.
One of my patrons got into the branch,
saw them throwing books in the garbage.
Admittedly, these were paperbacks off the paperback racks at that moment.
They weren't catalog books.
Those were really good paperbacks, but I had shown them carefully that were very interesting.
They were the ones I couldn't get into the collection because they weren't in the catalog.
That's how I got involved with this whole thing.
I began to ask myself questions about lack of money for libraries as a sort of a covert form of censorship.
and a whole panoply of intellectual freedom issues slowly became more and more apparent since 1989.
It's interesting that all three of you mentioned the Guild.
Why don't we start... How is it that the Guild is significant in this whole discussion?
Well, it was the Intellectual Freedom Committee of the Guild that put together this program, the program that started all of this.
Started what?
started the renewed interest or the scrutiny of the library.
Yeah, that came out in the media, finally, after nine years of struggling and trying to get people's attention at what was going on.
This May 30th event really had a nerve.
This was after the New Main Library had opened.
So after the New Main Library opened, and we knew already it was too small, we knew that the collections were in danger, did we know that things had been, we suspected that things had been discarded.
But it wasn't until the public found out about it that it was significant.
Now, you asked about the Guild.
The Guild's connection to all of this is that Melissa and Andrea, as the Intellectual Freedom Committee of the Guild, presented this lecture program.
I love the card.
Isn't it wonderful?
It's wonderful.
Mostly Melissa, because she was the one who got in touch with Nick Baker.
Is that right?
So you engaged Nick?
Yeah, well, what happened is that Nick had his article on the card catalog in the New Yorker, you know, 1994 or something, and Pat Vanderberg, who was the librarian at the library school, was an old friend of mine.
And so I called her up and got his number, I think, actual phone number, I think, or maybe it was the email address, I can't remember.
Anyway, I either called him or emailed him shortly after the, what was it called?
Discards?
Discards.
And talked for a while.
And at that time, he had too many deadlines and was too busy to really get involved in what was happening at San Francisco Public.
But we knew all along that after the new library opened, that there would be this nice new public room, a big auditorium, that would be perfect for a public event.
And we thought it would be nice if the Guild sponsors a series of events on intellectual freedom issues.
of various sorts.
We invited Nick Baker to give his talk.
At that moment, he had enough time to do it.
Then he spent a number of months researching what he would say at that talk.
Then we also asked Gray Brecken to speak.
I didn't know Gray, but he was a friend of James Brooke, who had done a book with Ian Bowell about libraries and stuff like that.
So the two of them were just a great duo, and we did this publicity, and we basically filled the room.
Do you have a copy of this?
Is this the actual talk?
Oh, that's Dick's talk?
Is that the original?
He sent me this.
Is this the thing about the weeds?
Yes.
I have this.
I don't know if this is in...
See, there was the New Yorker piece.
Oh, oh, the New Yorker piece was called Weeds.
No.
No?
No, no, no.
It was going to be called Weeds.
He might have given this to you when it was called Weeds.
Because it went through, first it was the talk, then he made it on.
This is an edited version?
This is the original talk.
Is this an extra copy?
This is what he did.
Somebody must have a copy of this, right?
I have a copy.
I have at least two copies back to the library.
Okay, so you may have a copy.
I encourage you to give me everything that you can.
I'm sorry, Melissa.
Oh, yeah, anyway.
The people at that lecture, and we have a tape somewhere, too, were like, they wanted to storm the opening library on the spot.
There were 225 people there or more.
The place was packed.
That auditorium had never been filled before for any, or never been filled again.
Do you think they can just see to hear Nick Baker?
Well, we did.
Look at this wonderful flyer.
Describe the flyer for me.
Describe what that image is.
The new main library is burning down.
There's a fire coming out of the atrium.
What's the significance of that?
Well, it was a controversial library, first of all.
It looks like you're certainly expressing your thoughts about it.
It's a metaphor for the destruction of knowledge.
We really don't know what drew 225 people there to tell you the truth, but thank God they were there.
Well, we had very good publicity.
We did.
We had talk about some real grassroots action going on.
hundreds of these flyers in all sorts of, in all colors.
Chris Carlson.
He doesn't want his name.
Oh, he doesn't want his name.
Oh, okay.
Because he's trying to do a project for libraries.
He's trying to do a project for libraries, but he doesn't know about the libraries he knows.
Well, we had a pro bono designer.
And he's distributed everywhere.
And people on the inside and the outside.
As one of the, you know,
and stuff.
Trust me, I'll probably use 3% of them.
Yeah, we understand.
But that's just one meme I know that he didn't be in.
I mean, for years later, it may not be me.
It's very interesting, though.
When I think of the Baker stories, I almost think of them as a pair.
But that's not the way it happened.
He wrote the Discard story, and that was a discreet story.
Oh, yeah.
And then on the strength of that,
Clearly, you knew he was living here, and so you invited him to participate on the strength of that.
So one didn't necessarily lead into the other.
Well, in my mind, one led to the other.
I mean, from his standpoint, that was finished work as far as he was concerned.
And he had no pants, but he also said, I remember it as him feeling a little maybe guilty that he didn't do enough work.
for maybe his, and I think he even said this in a lecture about Rochester, his home, Rochester, New York.
He says it in the New Yorker piece.
Yeah, so he did say it in the New Yorker piece, so this was a way of atoning, I suppose.
Yeah.
And he sure did.
He was the very first one who listened to us.
The very first.
Can you imagine?
We had talked, well, I mean, we had talked to
There were many journalists in large and small groups over the years since 1989.
People were calling the material.
Not just the three of us, but lots of people calling us.
Nothing ever happened.
The only time they were interested in the library was some sex scandal.
Some books.
I came to this recently that there would be a photograph of the dump truck with the books.
I can't promise anything, but that could really be the title of the chapter.
I don't know.
That's just wonderful.
Isn't it wonderful?
I love good chapter titles.
I was thinking of books in exile, so I don't know.
This came to me.
Maybe I was half asleep.
Well, think of them, you know.
There's Tilly Olsen.
No, Dee just said something about that.
Why are you holding these books?
I'm waiting to repatriate them.
I look at them as exiles.
That's not bad.
That would be wonderful if it can be determined that these books really should be part of the collection.
Are you kidding?
I saw the list.
She's determined that fully 8% of them
I don't care what they are.
If it's a last copy, who's to judge what the content is?
That's intellectual fascism.
When you say a book deserves to be there, it doesn't because it's irrelevant.
After the earthquake, when books were sent to storage in what is known as the Carlson Stacks, which is really just a
How do we spell that?
It was a hospital.
It was named after a former library commissioner.
Carlson, C-A-R-L-S-O-N.
He found this remote storage for the books that had been in the stacks that had collapsed in the earthquake and they had to...
So the way they determined which books from our collection would go to these remote stacks... That's very interesting.
You see, this is almost the pyrotextual thing that I mentioned at the beginning.
Exactly.
Go ahead, yeah.
The way they decided it was anything that hadn't circulated... In two years.
In two years.
Geez.
Well, they started off with that.
Two years?
Yeah.
It's totally... It's horrible.
It's horrible because they decided...
The administration and the department heads, certain department heads, decided that they were going to reorganize.
So they reorganized, they shut down, they made one department disappear, they collapsed two other departments into one another, so the literature department was no more.
The old history and social science department became the humanities department, along with the literature department.
collapsing both of those forms into one.
In order to create a huge circulating department, where they decided everything in every call number area, with the exception of business and science and art music, would be compressed into this.
Thereby separating the librarians from their collections.
It was just a big room that had once been a wonderful subject department, but it was just now a big room with all these temporary shelves in them.
What kind of were they?
Metal shelves?
Wooden, like pine.
There was no staff.
No reference stuff in that room.
Any time somebody with a page was in their books, they would just go and ask the page.
It was horrible.
There was nothing systematic about ... Basically, all the circulating books for the whole library, except for the children's books, were in that one room.
This is post-earthquake.
That was the excuse.
They used the earthquake to do this major reorganization.
And then they said they were calling it a template for the new main.
A template?
Yeah.
It was a template for the new main.
Who was calling it that?
Dallin.
Oh, Dallin.
And they had had plans to do this kind of thing before, but they had never been approved.
They were just under discussion.
But people were very unhappy about it.
This was a great excuse.
Dallin had been saying things like, let me tell you, there's three kinds of change, blah, blah, blah, but the fourth kind is.
when you have an earthquake at the perfect time to rearrange your books.
There's some quote that has been attributed to him to clean out the Augie's famous.
It's in the Bay Guardian article.
Isn't that something?
To compare books to horseshit.
But then there's the other famous quote that's so wonderful, and that's in Augie Kleinzeller's
is that his last name, in the article, and I brought it with me, where his friend, the dean of some school at UC Berkeley, calls the new main library 20 pounds of shit in a 10-pound bag.
I didn't know a dean said that.
I've been saying that around to people.
Oh, my goodness.
And I had forgotten for the longest time who said it and where, and I found the article.
Is that right?
So we could document that?
Oh, you could document that.
You could call Augie.
But Dallin didn't put that.
Dallin did not say that this friend... Yeah, but that's a knockout to me.
Right.
Absolutely.
But it doesn't about what it says.
It really does say something about the vision, the so-called vision that went into the building of this library.
And so what happened after the earthquake, which was a total...
For anybody who still had some kind of belief that Denlon was doing the right thing, totally lost faith in him and became convinced that he was out to destroy them.
what was, at that point, a good city library.
Underfunded.
Underfunded, apparently.
Well, there was a period in the 60s when William Holman was there that they were pulling all these... I found him, by the way.
You found him?
You got his phone number?
Well, I reached him, and he was on the road, and then I called home yesterday.
In fact, when I was in Dallas, Fort Worth, my neighbor, and my wife said,
And he knew the worth of the collection.
I think he's a bookman.
Yes, he is a bookman.
His son's a printer.
That matters.
He was very much aware of the bibliophiles in the city and was instrumental in putting together that rare book room.
He was the one who brought the Grant Warner collection to the library.
He was responsible for that.
He was also responsible for bringing in the Harrison collection of Calligraphy and Lettering.
These are really important collections that he was involved in.
was responsible for him, you know.
So, did Darwin replace him?
Where's Kevin Starr been in all this?
He came after Homer, and then Franz, and then John Franz.
I mean, I was shocked today to see that tape.
They had also another one that was on the local PBS station.
Yes, I just watched that again myself.
I didn't know that Starr was the city library.
I might have to talk to him.
He was a civil librarian without being a librarian.
That happens.
Archibald McLeish wasn't a librarian.
James Billington.
I've interviewed James Billington.
He's not a librarian.
Paul LeClerc at the New York Public Library was doing spectacular things.
Barton Gregorian is now at the Riverside.
He's on the board.
He just took over to Carnegie.
Right, but he's on the board of the U. That's true.
But he's on the board of Riverside?
Yeah, but he's also on the board for Bill Gates.
Yeah, but that's controversial.
This Riverside thing is real.
Well, it's Riverside, I don't know.
That's a privatized library that I was telling you about.
Totally privatized public library.
Riverside, California?
Yes, Riverside.
The county library.
Well, Sid Berger's down there at UC Riverside.
Sid's a friend of mine.
I'm surprised you haven't heard about this, the privatizing a library?
Well, the counties were devastated by the budget cuts in the state.
money was pulled out of the counties.
I don't know exactly what the mechanism was.
So the county libraries are all in bad shape, and in Riverside's case, they just completely... It's all about the Prop 13, because after Prop 13, the state was still reaching out that the state would give extra money to the libraries, especially the county libraries.
But then, here it is, almost 10 years later, the state is getting...
the economy got worse you know 15 years later and the state started like taking money away from the county so you have some counties in california and have libraries and so yeah and they and so this kind of thing well in new england kevin star will know because we have public libraries and every little town never mind well yeah kevin star will know that's a good question all those statistics for you
But Riverside found itself, I don't know that much about it, but I'm assuming they found themselves in a budget crunch.
They had no money for a library.
They said, oh, well, we're really down to our last $2 million.
How can we do this?
No, I'm just guessing, but you mentioned that Barton is on this.
Of course, you know that the New York Public Library is basically private.
Private, yes, it is.
It's a totally private library.
Yes, we know.
Now, not the branches.
The branches are public.
Fifth Avenue and all those great collections and the Schaumburg collection.
That's a private... Paul LeClaire says to me, how much money do you think I have to raise every week?
Every week to run this?
And I said, $200,000.
Let's try $600,000 a week.
$30 million a year.
And he just got $10 million to do this thing with P&A.
He got Bill Blasky, $10 million.
In fact, this is great.
The other side is a contract.
It's contracted out to a company.
But the money is still coming from the government.
The money for the library is still coming from the government.
Well, that's a huge difference.
It is.
It's a totally different kind of project.
Yeah, that really is.
But this is... They're finding a cheaper... They think they're finding a cheaper way.
They're outsourcing it.
They're outsourcing the whole system.
They're saying, enough, we can't handle it.
It's like sending your prisoners to Texas.
Because it's cheaper down there.
And a lot of the same staff is supposedly there.
I mean, they think that they can do it more efficiently, but I don't know what happens to civil service and all those sorts of things.
Oh, it's gone.
It's all gone, huh?
If it's privatized, you can just get rid of it.
If they're working for... If the librarians who are in the building are working...
What's the name of the company?
Oh, they're in Maryland.
Yeah, they're in Maryland.
We've got to know that.
I mean, I'll go visit them.
That's an interesting enough story.
Well, the problem I think I might have with that, you know, maybe it's not.
Well, I've got lots of problems.
I have a problem.
Who do you answer to?
You know, I mean, I serve the people.
You know, in a public library, public librarians serve the people.
who are paying for this service.
And so in a private library, I'm not quite sure that that happens.
Well, are there librarians even?
I mean, I'm sure that to become efficient that you're... Who's picking the bus?
I know.
How exactly has it all happened?
When they're trying to do things on the cheap, they're doing what they tried to do at San Francisco Public, which is what David Price and Ken Dowling tried to do was
We saw it coming, we knew it was coming, but it was really him or us, because he wanted to get rid of the librarians.
He wanted technicians to be answering questions, and he wanted retired visiting scholars, retired, what did he call them, scholars in residence, to be
Ordering the books, selecting the materials, and being the resource.
Like the editorial board of the Book of the Month Club.
They meet once a month over copy, and somebody's giving them a waste, and they go rubber stamp them, and that's that Bennett syrup, and all these other things.
Visiting scholars give them a stipend.
A very generous stipend.
Or maybe get him to do it for free.
Look at all those retired librarians that got four other jobs that you've worked with.
Well, that's, I think, how little he either understood or cared about what the public library did.
And in particular, this public library, he had absolutely, there was no respect at all for what this particular, what this library was about, nor was there any respect for the work of the library staff.
I mean, was this a sense that you had that you were on this guy's hit list?
Or was there anything really explicit?
Oh, he was doing things all the time to dumb down.
Well, first of all, he dumbed down the collections or the departments.
He eliminated departments.
So when you do that... Can you give me some examples?
He got rid of literature.
History and social science.
History and social science and literature.
But I'm going to get some questions to ask him.
I was seeing him this week.
Okay, he put... What would you like to have him answer?
I'm asking you to compose my questions.
What I'm trying to say is he took away our subject expertise.
He tried to eliminate...
the experts in the library by combining things together and thereby, what did he call it?
Leveling the access.
He did not believe, and still does not believe, that San Francisco Public Library is a research-level public library.
What is meant by the phrase, leveling the access?
That would be a really good thing.
That's another way to ask questions.
Instead of being confrontational, what is meant by the phrase, and then we start our conversation.
Another thing is, I don't know how you put it, but maybe we can figure this out.
What did he mean by it?
He meant by giving very popular titles abroad and shallow.
This is also...
That's why we feel that a lot of the dumping happened.
Supposedly, you would be reaching out to more people by giving them more breath dollars, or something like that, is what it comes down to.
Well, that's what they were saying about, that's how they were selling the New Main to the Library Foundation, was we're going to go out and reach people we've never reached before.
And the way they had to do that was to promise them something that a public library couldn't provide them.
But they made it seem like... Internet access.
Oh, no, just a place.
Videotapes.
A place.
A spot.
The African American Center.
The Filipino Center.
The Gay and Lesbian Center.
This is shocking.
And they did it by... What do they call them?
Affinity.
And that's even... Oh, they took that directly from the nuclear movement.
The nuclear movement.
Anti-nuclear movement had affinity groups.
This is called the Great Paradigm Shift.
This is the Great Paradigm Shift.
This is based upon one person's vision, not necessarily balance, but one or two people's vision of what this library should be.
It wasn't based on anything we had ever seen before.
It was based upon what
they saw in New York or somewhere else.
In fact, we were told.
Yeah, whose name?
Well, Steve Coulter and Ken Dallin.
They went to visit, Coulter even says, when he went to visit the Schomburg Collection in New York.
That was where he got this idea.
The original idea, well, she knows.
But the Library Foundation ran up against a brick wall.
They raised a certain amount of money, and it stopped.
And I can't, I don't remember what year, but I guess in 1992 or so, it stopped at 16 million or 93.
It stopped at 16 million?
Yes.
Sixteen.
Now, what's the Library Foundation?
Oh, well... Forgive me.
The Library Foundation was created because when you have a public bond... This is a public entity.
No, no, no.
When you have a public bond to build a building in San Francisco, or probably in many cities, there's a restriction on the use of the funds.
The voters work for the bond, so the restrictions are it can only be for the building.
And that money can't be used for operating expenses, and it can't be used for furnishings.
A bookshelf, or book anything.
Or a computer.
Can I interrupt you?
We're refurbishing the city hall.
If they need new desks in there, are they forming a foundation to raise some money for the new desks for city hall?
If you build a new school, you have to have a foundation to put desks in the school.
There's something wrong with this somehow.
I think it was interpreted in such a way that
We needed more.
Anyway, what the library felt they understood was that we needed more money.
What they really needed more money was for staff, but they didn't do anything about that.
I have to say that I worked in the office with Kathy Page in Facilities Development, so I'm not coming from outside going, oh, they were doing good things.
I mean, I could see.
I said to her,
Oh, I lost my train of thought.
We're talking about the library board.
Okay, so this foundation was formed because we needed $30 million.
And I don't know how they picked that goal, but that was their goal.
And what were they going to do with that $30 million?
We're still working.
The desk, the computer.
All the equipment, all the furniture.
Anything that wasn't built.
But in addition, as the thing developed,
It became apparent that the $100 million that was in the bond was not adequate to do anything except build the shell or with the most basic... Concrete or something.
Infrastructure or whatever the hell.
Yeah, it wouldn't make it pretty.
It would make it functional.
It would be adequate, but it wouldn't be pretty.
So as they brought people in,
To raise money from people, they had to tell them it's going to be grand.
And we're going to give you a gay and lesbian affinity center?
No, no, no.
When it first started, it wasn't like that.
When it first started, it was raising money for the library.
You got the usual socialites and the usual people who contribute to the opera and those sorts of things.
You got money from them.
But they reached a point that they couldn't get the $30 million.
And so they got this team.
Who came up with this idea?
Who came up with this?
Steve Golden.
Well, he says he... Well, ask him.
Yeah, ask him how he came up with it, because my understanding is that he... How did you come up with the affinity idea for the affinity group?
Oh, yeah, yeah.
I think what I thought happened was that when they... Before, when they first started making maps to the library, the two...
chief architect at a local firm and a priest, Simon and Tree, and then Coulter and Kathy Page,
and went on a tour of libraries grand libraries in europe and on the east coast and they didn't they didn't come back with an appreciation of books anyway so then he visited the sean burke and got the idea for the gay and lesbian center at that time so i've always believed
This is what you can find out.
The original intention was to have a gay and lesbian
It makes sense that you would actually have a place for authors to put their papers, and it would be really a research center.
Fundamentally, I think that's a great idea.
Yeah, it is.
They fundraised, but they found out that it was so successful.
So they started with this, but then when they went, they thought, let's do it for these other ethnic groups besides the gays.
And then you went into trouble, because this really had a function as being, here you have a city which is
probably more gay than any other.
You have all these authors, you have a real archival function, and it actually made sense.
Maybe you could have a librarian that would tend it, and so forth.
But if you duplicate that for all these others... Well, what it's doing, though, is really scary.
disparage Filipino-Americans anyway.
But then other people will say, well, why didn't you pick us?
There's no author center.
There's no poetry center.
They never went to the literary community in the city.
Which is not inconsiderable.
That's the point.
They tried to crush the literary, I mean, that's the whole thing about the
The abomination that is over there on that third floor, and it's called General Collections and Humanities, is because, Dallin, I really believe that the administration and whoever decided on this road went out of their way to exclude the literary community.
Our literature department
is no more.
I mean, that was what was hit on in a major way.
You mean in terms of books?
In fiction?
Well, it was partly dumped.
But first of all, there is no literature department anymore.
That means no subject specialties.
No subject specialties.
It was rolled into something called the humanities department, which is fine with me if it incorporates all of these different areas of the humanities.
at a research level.
Yeah, fine.
But then when you go further and decide, oh, you're going to call it the General Collections Department, well, I said to Mr. Gallen, but that's so amorphous.
I mean, what is that, General Collections?
He said, well, and humanities isn't amorphous.
He said?
Yes.
What is the rap against you people from the other side, the librarians?
This was the letter.
This was the famous letter.
We gave the Library Foundation.
It's private, totally private.
We have no oversight.
They aren't required to make any public disclosure, right?
No, they are not.
Now, they have a contract with the library, the MOU.
And we in the Guild fought that MOU because one of the things was... Before the library opened, this is complicated, but one of the things that they wanted to do was continue to raise money for the library.
Now, when the Library Foundation was first formed to raise money for the New Main, we were told that it was a...
temporary thing we they would be we'd go back we have the friends we have our you know fundraising but after the new main was built the foundation was just getting going and so they wanted to raise money for the branches they wanted to raise money for an endowment for books they wanted to do all these things and the way they were going to do this was to have events in the library and rent the space like a bar mitzvah like
a corporate Christmas party.
And that would be fine.
I'm Nick Grosgames.
I've written a book.
My publisher wants to send me here.
We want to rent the hall.
Yeah, well, that would be better.
I was just saying, hey, great.
That's great.
It'll cost you 500 bucks for the room and for the caterer.
Even that might be fine if there were certain limitations on how this all happened.
But instead, what they envisioned was
$20,000 to rent the atrium to some big corporation.
Or they claimed that they were going to raise how many million?
I don't even know.
But when they went for their MOU, the MOU was giving them permission to be in charge of events management.
Yes, exactly.
The real trouble is two things.
One is that the building was not built
They wanted the run of the collection.
They wanted the run of, for instance, all of the Special Collections Department.
Sorry.
So that every night there would be these events.
Now, the other thing is the library closes at 8 o'clock at the latest every night, and 5 or 6 o'clock, 5 o'clock Friday, Friday and Sunday, 6 o'clock Monday.
So the other theory was they were going to pump
True, lots of groups.
But the point of the building and having these meeting rooms, a Latino-Hispanic meeting room in that auditorium, was so that the public would have a place to have free events.
But because the foundation wanted to make the money off of it, and because they decided to close the library so early, there weren't going to be a single night when anybody could actually have a program in the evening for the public for free, because you'd have to leave by quarter to eight.
to empty the building.
And then when the library, before it opened and they were thanking the funders for things, they were like, and they're still doing it, walking in the stacks in the new periodical room with this grease going up in the air.
Yeah, it was a walk.
The last event they had, they were cooking with a walk in the newspaper and periodical room.
It had food on every floor.
This was for the nearest convention.
Where they closed the library down.
We're not the only library where this is happening.
They closed down Denver Public's new building for five days to have the G7, G8 there.
What's G7?
You know, the European Economic Summit that they have.
They took over the library.
They moved collections, we understand, so that the G8 people could... Yeah, they were trying to figure out how to accommodate... Oh, the Europeans!
So, I mean, it's not as if we're the worst, but, you know, you've got to draw the line, you know.
I'd go outside.
Well, that's a good story.
I mean, has this been published anywhere?
Yeah.
In American Libraries or LJ, I think I remember seeing and hearing short readings.
John Berry is, it'll be a wonderful course for you.
John Berry is the editor of Library Journal.
He's written there editorials for the last 30 years, and he's a friend of mine for 30 years.
He's a very delightful man.
Are people suggesting that
Clearly, this is not for salaries or anything like that.
It's not like going out on strike.
You know, we're talking about a deal.
Well, you know what?
What's the obligation?
This is what they think.
This letter came.
Now, we fought against the MOU to get some changes, to get some control, to get the library, because $10 was signing over the library to the Library Foundation, a private institution that had no oversight.
He was doing it, and we were the only people standing in their way.
Right.
And so we... And we barely knew anything about it ourselves.
And we talked about keeping the public library for the public, and we, you know, did all this thing.
And we were going to the church.
Do we know who we are with people who are on there?
Well, there's a board of the foundation.
Oh, I have it right here.
But this letter was signed with people from...
From the affinity groups.
And it did not come with the Library Foundation letterhead.
So it's not from the Foundation.
It's just some of these people who were so affronted by us that they had to say that we were... Who's the letter written to?
The entire library staff.
The library staff and Ken Dallin made sure there was like 50 copies.
It was put out with the paycheck.
With each paycheck, you got one.
one thing that had happened is that toba singer had toba singer is a guild member not one of us
like toba singer wrote an article an op-ed piece that appeared in the examiner where she all the stuff you're getting okay where she criticized the foundation for um the op-ed piece what did she say exactly oh just the organization organization um wow let me see it was really it was an important
In the words of Dr. Arthur H. Coleman, co-chair of the African American Affiliate Group, Toby Singer has a curious use of words.
To the black community, window dressing is what we got when we were not allowed to participate.
It was an effort to appease us.
Does anyone truly think that the African American community is so naive that it would ever contribute over a half million dollars for window dressing in May?
And the point is, so you end up with these rooms which are untended, don't have money for the collection,
They cause all kinds of problems.
There's people doing graffiti in them.
Was any of this money earmarked?
It was supposed to be, but wait.
To build a pretty room.
Oh, even not even already here.
But wait a minute.
I just have to say something, too.
This was about the ghettoization of the library collections that were formerly all together.
Everybody was equal.
Everybody was about inclusiveness.
Right.
During the great dumping,
that happened, during the great dumping that happened, you can believe, because I witnessed it, that there were African-American titles that were being dumped.
And here, they're talking about
What was so interesting about the foundation is that they claim to be reaching out to people that the librarians, the library, had never reached out to.
Steve Colton would say that all the time.
The library never reached out to the community.
How are you supposed to reach out?
Well, we didn't have money because it's a public institution.
Right.
But we did.
We had branches.
We talked about people.
People are really happy when you borrow something.
Yeah, that's right.
If anybody else, the colleges didn't take things.
How can I help you?
We have branches devoted to the Spanish community, the black community, the Asian community.
We have no restriction on anybody using it.
We have international language collection.
We have Russian collection.
We've always done this.
But Steve Colter recognized, I think it's tainted by his view of the gay and lesbian thing, which is different.
Yeah, see, he doesn't understand the difference.
He puts all these racial categories.
Race categories in what's gay and lesbian.
Now, the gay and lesbian collection, and he'll talk to you about this, the center, has a really important purpose that's sort of the opposite of the public life.
Well, they believe that they're setting aside stuff to keep it safe from the government.
He said that at a commission meeting.
We're keeping it in case a bad government comes into power and wants to destroy our culture.
Oh, like the Magnus Hirschfeld.
All kind of stuff that I have.
Oh, you know, pulp novels, papers, Randy Schiltz.
Oh, yeah, those manuscripts.
Randy Schiltz collection.
Randy Schiltz collection and the film collection of Peter Adair.
Right.
And the manuscript collections are kept up in our department, in the San Francisco History Center.
There's bizarro things going on because there weren't any real...
ways for them to develop the collection in the same place that the center was.
The basic problem is instead of the library deciding what kind of library it is and what it needs and what it wants to be,
This was driven by money.
Where's the money?
But it's true that we believe that the gay and lesbian collection was a good idea, but even that was not really good.
What's really funny about it is he's not protecting it.
He doesn't want to protect the culture from corporatization.
He doesn't want to protect the culture from other forces.
He's protecting the culture against government.
If you really want to build a great collection, as you should, then this is the city to do it in, and this is the place to do it in.
You'd go out and you'd do a search and you'd come up with, I'm trying to think, a scholar, ideally gay in this particular case, who would go out and build the collection, who would know the kinds of things.
The idea would be to have somebody build it, curate it, and
But collection seems to be quite irrelevant to the whole thing.
At the same time, they were developing this, so-called developing this, with their vision.
They were ordering the mass dumping of our book collections, which included the very books that are supposed to be in the Etc.
Let's talk about the great dumping.
At what point were you people aware of
After the earthquake.
The fact that, you know, it's like, I mean, you hate to make comparisons.
Like, when in the 30s and the 40s, people noticed that their neighbors were disappearing.
They were going off to cut.
Immediately.
And the Black Mariahs were coming for them, too.
The Black Mariahs were coming for our books.
And I don't care if I use... Stand by my language.
I will stand by my language.
Except there were white trucks.
They attacked Nicholson for saying...
That was a library staff member talking about the discard room.
But the fact is, we were all aware of what was happening after the earthquake.
We knew that there were books that were destroyed because of the earthquake.
I participated in trying to make sure that there were
in my department, which was literature at that time, we had them taken care of, but we sent them to be repaired, either by FEMA monies or through our preservation department.
They either were repaired or they were preserved in some way.
Or if they were so totally destroyed by the earthquake, they had to be withdrawn, and that was just totally understandable.
But at the same time, when all of these
There were a couple of things going on at one time.
Books that hadn't circulated in two years got sent to Carlson Stacks.
People went through, librarians went through with stamps, stamping of books to look as though they had been circulated.
Is that right?
That's right.
Well, green-tagged books... Did you do any of this?
Well, I was in that department that did it.
I served up green tags for any book I wanted to keep.
A green tag meant you stayed.
What meant it was dead?
First, let me go through all the different tags.
Green meant you stayed.
that was books that had circulated within two years.
Oh, it's Africa-esque.
Oh, it's horrible.
Books are alive to me.
I know.
They are alive.
I feel this very... Okay, so anything that didn't circulate in the last two years got a yellow tag, I believe, and stayed in the stacks.
Anything that circulated that was older than that got sent to the Carlson stacks.
Anything that was called an NOF or wasn't in the catalog, not on file.
That makes a good point.
Yes, okay.
Then there were 800 boxes.
I was corrected the other day.
NOF equals DOA, basically.
Yes, death camps.
Except there are some that are coming back.
Well, yes, there are a lot.
Actually, we did get to save a lot, but those NOFs got sent up to the deselection chamber.
The de-selection chamber.
That's right.
What became known as the de-selection chamber by then the humanities staff, because it was the responsibility... Where is the de-selection chamber?
On the third floor of the old main library.
The place that had the most earthquake damage.
It was closed down.
Right.
And it was where the old chief... Who was doing the work in here?
Who was doing this stuff?
library staff and PIC workers, private industry council workers, plus volunteers to pick the books up off the floor.
We got all the books picked up in our department.
Sounds like a slot of houses.
Well, yeah, it was.
You know what I'm saying?
Yeah, but that's what we felt.
Yeah.
So, you know, in our department... And the point was, let me just, one second.
The stacks could have been mended.
For how much?
$30,000?
I never, I didn't... We got all the books picked up in a week.
We, as a library staff, you know, felt that the library could have been opened, you know, in November, three weeks after the earthquake.
And see, the building was October 89, October 17.
The building wasn't really damaged.
It was just that some of the metal shelving was damaged.
And that could have been.
And there were broken light bulbs and maybe even cracks.
Oh, yeah.
I mean, you know, there was a little bit.
And the shelves fell down.
But the shelves, I mean, but the shelves, they got an estimate at one point that the shelves could have been fixed for, like,
I don't know, $300,000 or $30,000, and they could have used FEMA money to do that.
But Dallin said that because we were heading towards this new building in 1996, he didn't want to spend that money.
But in fact, if he had had the interest, if he had been sort of methodical and had the interest of the collection at heart, public service at heart, he wouldn't have made all these changes so rapidly.
And basically, also, it worked with advantages because it made the library so crowded and the collection so small that it made the new library look big and luxurious and lots of seats.
So here's the original label.
His vision becomes very clear to him.
He is a man on the top of the world
That earthquake was saved his, I mean, really, was a lucky thing that came along for him.
It gave him the opportunity, the cover.
That's right.
It gave him cover to do it.
Whatever he wanted.
Somebody said, I fail still to grasp.
Is he expressing anybody's will?
I mean, is this the creation of Ken Dowling?
I think a lot of people... Did this city want this kind of a life?
No, we wanted something modern, basically.
We did need more space for books.
That's how it got passed.
And Kevin Steyer didn't want a new building.
No, and neither did John France.
And many other libraries that have built new buildings have combined it with the old buildings.
Well, Boston is not an example.
LA did it, too.
I mean, you need that much space.
This was partly the reason why John Franz had to leave.
Right.
That was partly the reason why.
Well, we were responsible for getting rid of John Franz ostensibly.
John, how do you spell his name?
F-R-A-N-T-D.
He just died this year.
What was he?
He was a previous city librarian.
That's what he said.
Job security at that job is not bad.
What happened to start?
Did he quit?
Did he shift down?
He wanted a sabbatical to write a book, is that it?
And he's written some very fine books, by the way, those Oxford University Press books so familiar with them.
Well, and I believe the mayor at the time said no, so...
No, what?
No, he could not take a leave.
Oh, and so, but you would have to get that.
He's very diplomatic on this tape about this thing.
He admits that he opposed it, but maybe, you know, it's okay.
And he also says there's great gaps in the collection.
Anyway.
Well, Dallin says that he thought, he knew that you couldn't close branches in San Francisco, and Dallin didn't know that, and that was another thing that made Dallin really...
suspect early on is he immediately started to close branches.
How many branches are closed?
He never succeeded.
He closed one because it wasn't a neighborhood, it was the business branch.
And the business community is apparently still very unhappy about this.
Oh, but they never came forward, though.
How many branches?
Well, 26.
So he would always say that we need, you know, fewer, better, bigger branches.
But the trouble is, people need branches that you can walk to and that you can, you know,
It's like a public park.
If you have small little public parks that are within two blocks of your house, they'll be heavily used.
If all you have is one neighborhood park, but you have to walk 20 blocks to get to it, it'll be underutilized.
So even if there's not as much information... The thing about Dowling, how Dowling got... I mean, Dowling was hired for his vision of technology.
Right.
The Library Commission... He simply reflected somebody's wants.
Yes.
Somebody on that Library Commission...
is credited by James Chafee, who has followed this whole process for 22 years and knows it.
I didn't get involved until 1989, so I know nothing about the Dallas election.
But Chafee says that Marjorie Stern did not like the three candidates, I guess it was, that they came up with.
And by the way, Regina Manudry was one of the applicants, we understand, for that job originally.
And it would be interesting to find out from Colter and Regina,
Why, is Coulter on this election for Dallas?
No.
Okay, for Regina, why she thinks she didn't get the job.
But at any rate, Marjorie Stern, apparently they threw out the process, they didn't like the candidates, threw out the process, and somebody talked to Gary Strong, who was State Librarian.
Yeah, and he was an old buddy of Dallas.
He was a State Librarian at the time.
Oh, right.
State Librarian at the time.
What did the State Librarian do?
runs the state library.
The bureaucracy.
But what is the state library?
We don't have one in Massachusetts.
Oh, do you have one?
There's a collection there.
Oh, because they bought some public at the state library.
I think you do.
I mean, it's certainly nothing that we bought.
They're like, they're the state, they, well.
Like, yeah, for the state archives?
Well, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And they lend collections of Bourne books to small libraries.
They do all sorts of things.
Kevin goes around, and they do, they, they, they,
We have hundreds of libraries.
Every town.
My little town has...
It doesn't even have 7,000 people.
It's got three libraries.
I'm in North Grafton.
There's one in North Grafton.
It's right next to Worcester.
Oh, yeah, Worcester.
Five miles down the street, Shrewsbury's got a huge library.
Some people think that's wasteful, but it's not wasteful.
That's the way you get people to read.
Dallin was hired for his vision.
He's reading the book called The Electronic Library.
He believed himself that we wanted him.
Is it kind of like a mind comp?
I mean, is the outline his vision in there?
It's really almost unillegible.
But here's the most challenging book.
Yeah, it's illiterate.
I mean, he misspelled consensus.
Oh, no.
Well, just read his website.
It's totally misspelled.
I went on it this morning for the first time, because I had that.
If he says in the email to me, check my website.
I'm surprised it's still up.
I want to send him an email saying, you have...
It's such gall.
It's a campaign website.
Well, he's winning for the ALA presidency?
No, no, that's over.
Nobody on the website is in there.
That's what I mean.
It should be down.
You know he lost by the biggest margin.
I checked to see how he did.
Wow.
Apparently, you know, he went around the country in a bus or a van or something, and he was giving I talked to a couple of librarians at ALA and other places about this, and he was, like, giving presents to people.
But then he went, he'd go to give a speech, and everybody's like, I couldn't believe it.
It's so boring.
It's so bad.
Well, he talks about...
Did you read the thing, his goals?
Yeah, he claims that he's a book person.
Okay, now, what was what we just saw?
I don't know, I'm just saying it.
Well, maybe he's learned his lesson, because people used to tell John Barry that he's learned his lesson about closing branches, so maybe he changed it.
You can't say you're against books.
The quote from the book is something like this.
The common wisdom has it said that you should have a strong children's children in the library because you'll get, you know.
But in fact, she said, but in fact, if those children, they'll grow up, they'll move away because we have a very multiple society.
So they won't use your library.
So it doesn't make sense to have a strong children's program.
You should have a newcomer's program instead.
He said this?
Yeah.
Well, that's, I mean, you know, maybe it sounded slightly better than that, right, in terms of, you know, the logic of it.
But the idea is that, yes, we, I mean, he's so narrow-minded.
He's only looking at this pie and not literally.
Well, he's so, you know, self-serving.
He says books used to be scarce, libraries used to be scarce, and education used to be scarce.
None of those things is true anymore.
There are lots of books, lots of publishers, there's lots of libraries, there's corporate libraries,
There's private libraries, there's university libraries, you know.
And education isn't scarce.
There's lots of community colleges.
We didn't used to have those.
There's lots of universities and extension courses.
So we don't need to serve those needs anymore for having lots of books.
You don't have to be a library and you don't have to have an educational function.
And what you need to do is focus on information.
Right.
And no, don't focus on content anymore.
And now he says, yeah, don't focus, that the library is interested in access, not content.
In a recent issue of American Libraries, he said, you know, when he said something, librarians have to focus on access, not content.
And this is the same thing with the dumbing down of, like, not having subject needs.
He basically, he doesn't really understand that in order to use a library,
You try to make it as self-service as possible, but most people are really, many people are not going to find what they want, especially in a subject search, unless they really know how to use a catalog, and it's a really good catalog, and unless they get help, and it has to be well organized.
Yes, Barbara Cuthman, or Virginia Woolford, or Shaw, the libraries are supposed to have content.
That's where they did all of their work.
It was Ken Calpenter telling a wonderful story.
about, you know.
You know, you're supposed to be able to go into the library and be anonymous and get your work done.
Librarians are helpful and help, you know, help you find what you're looking for.
And by serendipity and librarians help, that's it.
But see, what Kent's vision, I think, really was, and he talks about this in the book, that money for libraries was going to dry up because the public sector, everybody hates government and public sector is going to dry up and look at Prop 13 and everything.
So the library had to find new ways of finding itself.
So you have to pay for information.
You have to find a way to ingratiate yourself with government and business and get them to pay you for your stuff.
So his idea was things like have all of the records of the city government, you know.